---
layout: post
title:  "Some Thoughts on Documentation"
---

# Gathering Thoughts

Last month I began and failed to post about a prior school project's
documentation before starting an independent study. Work continued to escalate,as I am working in a design role, and I am new to most of it.

It's exciting but also challenging me to try to think about a block and answer
questions and come up with bug-fixes under pressure. In the years of prior work, I have been doing digital design where I'm trying to find bugs before there's a lot of pressure on the designer(s) and cost to deploy the bug-fixes. In many ways it's the opposite set of pressures and I'm still trying to adapt to it. 

  
Part of what feels acutely overwhelming are the number of interactions I have
to keep track of, and the importance of defining simple, intelligible
boundaries between blocks so jobs are clear-cut and new features don't require
modifying a zillion blocks. I am reminded of the concept taught in PES: to have
low coupling and high cohesion.

<br>
Now with a summer independent study deep underway in a state of disorganization, I have been struggling to get momentum due to a few nuisansome issues with tooling and, honestly,
perfectionism. Work has also demanded a lot of time, and frankly there is
disorganization there as well.

<br>
This blog post is to sort of consider the various tools for taking notes and consider what seems to work, how things have been used, and maybe how to pull things all together.

## Notes Consolidation

It's an even on my Outlook calendar at work. The idea is that every week I
pull together the prior week's work, and try to prepare for the next week
ahead. The goal is to think about to set my next work morning up for a quick
settle in by: (1) gathering up a summary of where I was so I don't have to
review too many notes, (2) reminding me of things that I was debugging, (3) give me confidence that what I'm workig on is the right thing.

<br>
As time has gone on I have not maintained this practice and it is time to
revive it. I can't keep everything in my head.

<br>
So what would notes consolidation look like? Where am I keeping my notes? What
tools have I used in the past, which do I like, and which will I use in the
future as I do "notes consolidation?"

<br>
Let's begin with the must-haves:


## College Note-Taking

College lectures are intense and unless the professor is bungling hard, the
lectures are jam-packed with essential information. Taking notes in a college
class is an art unto itself that I mastered, but it's also not too hard
considering how organized most of these presentations are. 
  

Consider the hundreds of times that a certain required course, some
long-bemoanded pre-req that has been taught regularly. Think about how standardized elements of the course must be. How many times it's been organized again and again. So to take notes during such a lecture means that the material isn't likely to be full of digressions.

<br>
Gradaute school is an interesting environment where a lot more organization
work is put on the student. Either as a part of their work as TA's or in
working on their projects. The more advanced the study, the less guidance
there is. There will not be a simple set of YouTube tutorial videos covering breaking topics. Self-directed learning at a high-school level is not so bad on account of the sheer abundance of information there is for that level of education. There's plenty for undergrad, but as topics get more advanced, the paywalls appear and more and more is bound up in papers rather than snappy videos.

<br>
So more than ever, self-directed note taking and gathering has taken on an
importance not only to get information about a subject from interactions with
professors, etc. but also work out schedule, expectations, and other
project-management items. In undergrad the goalposts were fixed but in grad
school there is room for discussion. It is more important than ever to both
advocate for oneself but also to be organized.

## Too Many Notes

At work, every word from my boss is not from on high. I often focus on some
detail and he goes on, and I lose track. It breaks the rhythm worse if I don't
ask for a pause, and it would be bad to constantly halt conversation to slowly
soak in implications or catch that interesting edge case or questionable thing
quickly.

